---
layout: post
title:  "Influence of Perceived Human-Likeness of an Advisor on Advice Integration in Financial Decision-Making"
date:   2026-03-31
categories: university psychology research
---

The rapid integration of artificial intelligence into daily life underscores
the need to further explore psychological processes underlying advice taking
from computational algorithms. Following the Judge-Advisor System, this study
investigates how the anthropomorphism of a chatbot advisor influences the
Weight of Advice within a financial investment game. In a within-participants
design, participants received recommendations from three advisor types: a
human financial advisor, a neutral AI chatbot and a humanlike AI avatar. The
study tested a ‘best-of-both-worlds’ hypothesis, positing that a combination
of algorithmic capacity and hu- man-like approachability would achieve the
highest levels of advice acceptance. Contrary to this prediction, the results
revealed a significantly lower Weight of Advice for the avatar com- pared to
the neutral chatbot. A repeated-measures ANOVA confirmed a significant main
ef- fect of the advisor type. These findings suggest that the impact of
anthropomorphism is do- main-specific and failed to achieve the desired effect
in the context of calculative financial consulting. In technical settings, the
simulated approachability of an avatar may trigger the ‘Uncanny Valley’
effect, inducing suspicion that causes users to favor a neutral chatbot. Fu-
ture research should focus on comparing domain-specific use cases of
Artificial Intelligence to further optimize the social dynamics of
human-machine interactions.



As of 2025, approximately one-third of the European population utilizes
generative artificial intelligence (GenAI) for personal and professional tasks
(Eurostat, 2025). This sta- tistic underscores a paradigm shift in
decision-making characterized by a heavy reliance on computational algorithms.
Historically, individuals sought counsel from scholars, religious figures or
oracles in situations marked by ambiguity, complexity, or high levels of
subjective uncertainty. Nowadays, algorithmically generated advice shapes our
dating life, shopping be- haviour, and investment decisions. The specific
social dynamics and psychological nuances of interacting with these non-human
advisors remain insufficiently researched. To address this gap, the present
study employs the Judge-Advisor System (JAS), a de- cision-making framework
where a single person, the judge, remains responsible for a final decision
after receiving recommendations from one or more advisors (Sniezek & Buckley,
1995). In a prototypical interaction, the judge first makes an initial
estimate or choice, then receives an advisor's suggestion, and finally weighs
both perspectives to arrive at a revised final decision. Following the
advice-taking literature, there are conflicting findings regarding how
individuals weigh and integrate recommendations (Bonaccio & Dalal, 2006). On
one hand, decades of research have established that formal, statistical
methods are consistently more reliable than human intuition. In his seminal
work, Meehl (1954) demon- strated that statistical methods of combining data
regularly outperform the judgment of hu- man experts. The core of this
argument is that human integration of information is often re- duced by
subjective biases and inconsistent weighting. More recent publications,
describe the tendency to prefer the advice of an algorithm over that of a
human expert as Algorithm Ap- preciation (Logg et al., 2019). On the other
side of the coin, even when an algorithm is proven to be superior, human
decision-makers can exhibit a systematic distrust labelled as Al- gorithm
Aversion. Dietvorst et al. (2015) found that individuals lose confidence in
evidence-based algorithms much more rapidly than in human forecasters after
witnessing both make the same mistake. This creates a paradoxical situation
where people erroneously choose a worse human advisor over a superior
algorithm.

The main aim of the present research is to generate insights into the usage of
GenAI by examining how the human-likeness of an advisor influences the weight
placed on advice. Specifically, we investigate whether financial
decision-making differs when receiving advice from a GenAI chat model versus a
human, and to what extent anthropomorphism moderates this effect. We chose a
financial investment scenario for three primary reasons: Firstly, finan- cial
decision-making carries high ecological validity because it is relevant in
daily life. Sec- ondly, individuals typically demonstrate higher levels of
engagement and cognitive effort when managing an important resource, reducing
the likelihood of arbitrary responses. Thirdly, financial decisions are
inherently numeric, which allows for the precise calculation of the Weight of
Advice (WoA), providing a continuous and objective metric to measure how much
a participant shifts their judgment toward the advisor's recommendation.
Firstly, we expect a significant difference in the WoA depending on the
specific type of advisor. This hypothesis tests the fundamental JAS principle
that the perceived source of a recommendation influences how much a judge
adjusts their initial estimate. Secondly, we ex- pect participants to assign a
significantly higher WoA to GenAI-based advisors compared to the human
advisor. This hypothesis aligns with Algorithm Appreciation, suggesting that
in numeric or calculative domains, participants may favor the perceived
actuarial accuracy of automated systems. Thirdly, we expect the degree of
anthropomorphism to moderate the in- fluence of the advice. Specifically, the
anthropomorphized AI advisor will receive a signifi- cantly higher WoA than
both the human advisor and the neutral AI chatbot. This prediction follows the
‘best-of-both-worlds’ hypothesis, positing that the combination of perceived
algo- rithmic expertise and human-like social cues will maximize advisor
influence.


# Method

## Participants

Each of the three experimenters reached out to friends and family to recruit
naive par- ticipants. Subsequently, a total of 58 individuals initiated the
online experiment between Jan- uary 15, 2026, and January 22, 2026. We
followed strict ethical guidelines, and all partici- pants took part
voluntarily. We excluded 19 participants who did not complete the experiment
procedure, three who were not native German speakers, and one due to poor data
quality. Fol- lowing these exclusions, the final sample comprised 35
participants (N = 35), including 20 men, 13 women, and two non-binary
individuals. The age of participants ranged from 18 to 58 years, with a mean
age of 25.86 years (SD = 9.67, Mdn = 24). The sample was characterized by a
high educational background and a high socio-eco- nomic status, due to being
close to a university. All participants were based in Germany, and German was
the primary language. The sample generally exhibited a lower financial risk
tol- erance and a higher self-reported trust in their own financial literacy.
While trust in Artificial Intelligence was generally low, the usage was quite
high with more than 50% utilizing it at least on a weekly basis (see Table 1
in Appendix A). A target sample size of N = 80 partici- pants was
preregistered to achieve a power of at least .80 (with α = .05) for detecting
small- to-medium effect sizes. This approximation was based on the planned
one-factor repeated measures ANOVA and three t-tests to compare experimental
conditions. However, the final sample (N = 35) did not reach the preregistered
target due to high attrition in the experiment


## Apparatus

The experiment was programmed using PsychoPy (Version 2025.2.3) and hosted
online via the Pavlovia platform (Peirce et al., 2019). Participants accessed
the study through their personal computers using either Chromium-based or
Firefox browsers. Audio output 6 was not required for the task. Stimuli
consisted of stock market visualizations and advisor av- atars. The stock
price fluctuations were generated as random walks using the Matplotlib Py-
thon library (Hunter, 2007). Each graph displayed a price history ranging from
150 to 230 days and ranging in value from 150 € to 350 €, combined with a
made-up four-letter Ticker Symbol. Advisor avatars were sourced from a
standardized artificially generated image data- base (Peterson et al., 2022).
To ensure the prototypicality of the finance advisor Stephan ava- tar, an
iterative selection process was applied. The selection criteria specified that
the human must appear to be a white man between 30 and 50 years old, possess
medium attractiveness, and wear formal clothing (see Appendix B for example
material)


## Research Design

he study employed a within-subjects experimental design to examine the impact
of advisor anthropomorphism on advice-taking. The independent variable,
Advisor Type, con- sisted of three levels representing varying degrees of
human-likeness: a human (financial ad- visor Stephan), an anthropomorphized AI
avatar (BRIAN AI), and a neutral AI chatbot (FI- NOVA IQ). The primary
dependent variable was the Weight of Advice, which quantifies the extent to
which participants revised their initial judgments following an advisor's
recommen- dation, calculated using the following formula $WoA = \frac{FI -
II}{A - II}$.

To control potential order and carryover effects, we used a complete
counterbalanced block design. Participants were randomly assigned to one of
six unique condition sequences, ensur- ing each advisor type appeared equally
often in every position. Fixed stock chart-advice pairs were utilized, with
both the order of presentation and the sequence of advisors being random- ized

## Procedure

The experiment started in the browser. Following informed consent and
eligibility ver- ification, participants were introduced to a hypothetical
scenario in which they had inherited 5,000 € to invest in the stock market.
The experimental procedure consisted of 30 trials with two optional breaks
after every ten-trial block and a final questionnaire. Each trial began with
an animated time-series visualization representing the daily price
fluctuations of a hypothet- ical stock, starting in January 2025. The
animation stopped at a randomized point between day 150 and day 230, at which
point a prompt appeared asking participants to indicate an in- vestment amount
between 0 € and 100 € from their trial-specific budget. Participants entered
their response numerically using the keyboard and confirmed the value by
pressing the ‘En- ter’ key. Once the initial judgment was submitted, a
chat-style interface pop-up appeared fea- turing the portrait and
recommendation of one of three digital advisors, depending on the as- signed
experimental condition (see Figure 3 in Appendix B). This was followed by a
sum- mary screen displaying both the participant's initial investment and the
advisor’s recom- mended amount. Participants were then required to provide a
final, revised investment judg- ment to conclude the trial. Feedback in the
form of profit or loss notifications was intention- ally not shown to preclude
potential learning effects or asymmetric trust dynamics. Upon completion of
the 30 trials (approximately 20 minutes), participants were administered a
final self-report questionnaire. This survey consisted of four items measured
on a 5-point Likert- type scale, assessing: (a) willingness to take risks, (b)
confidence in handling finances, (c) trust in AI systems, and (d) frequency of
daily AI usage (see Table 1 in Appendix A for re- sults). To evaluate the
internal validity of the advisor conditions, a manipulation check was
included, requiring participants to rate the perceived humanness of each
advisor. Finally, mo- graphic information was collected, including age,
gender, and German language proficiency. As a concluding measure of
preference, participants were asked to identify which of the three advisors
they would choose to consult in a future financial investment scenario.


# Results


o prevent extreme outliers from compromising the statistical integrity of the
WoA metric, we applied a Winsorizing technique commonly used in Judge-Advisor
System litera- ture to manage the ‘overshooting’ problem identified in
previous literature (Bonaccio & Da- lal, 2006). While 5.71% of all trials
exhibited some degree of overshooting behavior, only the most extreme cases
accounting for 0.7% of all trials required an adjustment. A manipulation check
was conducted to verify that participants perceived the manipu- lated human
likeness of the advisors correctly. While the AI advisors were successfully
iden- tified as non-human by 80% of the sample, the human advisor was rated
above the neutral humanness threshold by only 31.4% of participants.
Consequently, strict adherence to the pre-registered manipulation pattern was
observed in only 17.1% of cases. However, a relative post-hoc analysis
revealed that 45.7% of participants perceived the human advisor as more
human-like than the AI counterparts justifying the inclusion of the data in
the analysis.




## Statistical Analysis

## Figure 1

Individual Variations in Weight of Advice Across Different Degrees of
Anthropomorphism

assets/images/woa-across-different-anthropomorphisms.jpeg

Note. The gray lines illustrate individual participant trajectories across the
three conditions. Brackets at the top indicate pairwise comparisons between
conditions. The red vertical error bars represent the standard error of the
mean


## Explorative Analysis

Regarding the preference for future financial advice, the descriptive data
showed a clear lean toward the non-anthropomorphized agent. Of the
participants, 20 selected the neu- tral chatbot, followed by 17 who chose the
human advisor, while only 3 opted for the anthro- pomorphized chatbo

## Figure 2 Correlations Between Questionnaire Variables and Mean Weight of
Advice


assets/images/correlations-questionnaire-and-woa.png

Note. Red lines represent the linear regression for each variable. Spearman
correlation coeffi- cients indicate the strength and direction of the
associations.


As shown in Figure 2, pairwise Spearman correlations revealed that higher
financial confidence (rs = -0.24) and a greater willingness to take risks (rs
= -0.18) were both weakly associated with lower advice utilization.
Conversely, while trust in Artificial Intelligence (rs = 0.15) showed a slight
positive trend toward advice taking, frequent everyday usage of AI (rs =
-0.14) was linked to higher levels of advice discounting.


Post-hoc correlation analyses between initial and final investments revealed
that the human advisor (r = .518) introduced the most variance into
participant decision-making. In contrast, judgments remained significantly
more anchored to initial estimates in the neutral chatbot (r = .78) and
anthropomorphized avatar (r = .85) conditions. This suggests that the human
advisor possessed the greatest capacity to disrupt initial anchors and trigger
a reas- sessment of the investment.


# Discussion


The present study investigated how the perceived human-likeness of an advisor
influ- ences advice utilization within a financial Judge-Advisor System.
Specifically, we tested whether combining algorithmic competence with
human-like social cues would maximize the Weight of Advice compared to a
neutral AI chatbot or a human advisor. Supporting our first hypothesis, the
source of the recommendation significantly influ- enced how much judges
adjusted their initial estimates. However, the "best-of-both-worlds"
hypothesis was firmly rejected. We predicted that the anthropomorphized avatar
(BRIAN) would yield the highest WoA by occupying a ‘sweet spot’ between
algorithmic capacity and human approachability. Instead, the avatar generated
significantly lower advice utilization than the neutral chatbot and was
overwhelmingly rejected by participants when asked about their future advisory
preferences. Furthermore, the second hypothesis which predicted Algo- rithm
Appreciation, yielded nuanced results. While the neutral chatbot (FINOVA IQ)
was heavily utilized and was the most preferred future advisor, the human-like
avatar actively dis- couraged advice-taking

The rejection of the anthropomorphized advisor can be understood through two
theo- retical lenses. First, outfitting an algorithm with human-like cues may
have triggered the ‘Un- canny Valley’ effect (Zeng et al., 2026). Rather than
fostering trust, the simulated approacha- bility of the avatar likely induced
a sense of unease or suspicion, causing participants to ac- tively discount
its financial recommendations. Second, the lower acceptance of the avatar
highlights the domain-specific nature of advice-taking. Financial decisions
operate on a utili- tarian logic. In these numeric environments, individuals
value the perceived objectivity of al- gorithmic entity (the neutral chatbot)
while human-like avatars might foster trust in empa- thetic domains like
psychological counseling. The social cues of BRIAN AI appear to be detri-
mental in technical settings, where they distract from the expected accuracy
of the algorithm. Counterintuively, frequent daily use of AI correlated
negatively with WoA, while high general trust in AI was associated with higher
advice weighting. This suggests that regular exposure to GenAI does not
automatically translate into ‘blind trust.’ A plausible explanation is that
experienced users possess a more realistic assessment of the fallibility of
GenAI and maintain a more skeptical stance.



Finally, post-hoc correlation analyses between initial and final investments
revealed a unique dynamic regarding the human advisor. Judgments remained
heavily anchored to initial estimates in both the chatbot and avatar
conditions. In contrast, the human advisor introduced the most variance into
participant decision-making, showing the weakest correlation between initial
and final judgments. This suggests that while participants may state a
preference for the neutral chatbot, human advisors still possess the greatest
psychological capacity to disrupt initial cognitive anchors and trigger a
fundamental reassessment of a judge's prior beliefs


## Limitations

The study experienced a high attrition rate (32.8 %), which was primarily due
to the repetitive nature of the task and a lack of participant engagement.
While the introduction of 12 outcome feedback may have mitigated this boredom
and increased task-related effort, it was intentionally omitted to avoid the
confounding influences of order effects and fluctuating mo- tivational states
across trials. Consequently, our analysis is severely underpowered requiring
our findings to be interpreted as exploratory rather than definitive.


## Future Research


Future research should focus on incorporating direct feedback to make the
experiment more engaging, which is likely to reduce attrition and increase
overall participation. Addition- ally, it would be valuable to examine
advice-taking across different domains, comparing tech- nical or utilitarian
contexts (e.g., stock investment, logistics) with socio-emotional or medical
contexts (e.g., psychological counseling, healthcare). To maximize the
effectiveness of Gen- erative AI, it is crucial to investigate the underlying
social dynamics that shape interactions between human judges and machine
advisors.




